
Sophisticated Surface-to-Air System Needed to Shoot Down High-Flying Jets


The missile that the U.S. says brought down a Malaysia Airlines passenger jet over Ukraine would have been from a sophisticated surface-to-air missile system; the question that leaves is who fired on the plane.

Both Ukraine and Russia have such advanced systems as part of their militaryand some separatists rebels have claimed they do, too.
An adviser to Ukraine's interior minister accused pro-Russia separatists of shooting down the plane, though he didn't detail the basis for that allegation.
Ukraine's president was more circumspect, acknowledging the plane was shot down but not accusing any group.

Some rebels had recently claimed to have taken possession of the sort of vehicle-mounted, antiaircraft weapons capable of shooting down a jet flying at typical cruising altitude of some 30,000 feet.
But on Thursday, they backed down from that claim.

Your browser does not support HTML5 video.


0:00 / 0:00

Skip Ad

in 15

Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 came down over Ukraine Thursday after being hit by a surface-to-air missile like the Buk-M2 anti-aircraft system.
A look at the capabilities of the sophisticated weapons system.

Typical cruising altitude would be well beyond the reach of the shoulder-fired types that have so often been used in the Ukrainian war.

Still, the Ukrainian government says Russia has been funneling increasingly sophisticated weapons to rebels to buttress their crumbling defenses in the east, where they have lately been on the defensive.

Spokesmen for rebels have said they are getting the armsincluding tanks and armored personnel carriersfrom Ukrainian government stockpiles.

On June 29, rebel forces said they overran a Ukrainian military base and acquired a truck-mounted surface-to-air missile system, the Buk-M2, with a range capable of shooting down a commercial jet at cruising altitude.

Your browser does not support HTML5 video.


0:00 / 0:00

Skip Ad

in 15

WSJ's Jason Bellini walks through the timeline of the tragedy.

Ukraine's deputy interior ministry said that rebels had placed a battery of such missiles near the border, and apparently used it to shoot down what they thought was a cargo plane near where the Malaysian aircraft crashed.
Rebels claimed responsibility for downing a plane, near where the Malaysian aircraft crashed.
A Web page associated with separatist military commander Igor Girkin, who goes by the nom de guerre Igor Strelkov, announced that rebels had shot down a Ukrainian cargo craft, and that it would serve as a warning don't fly in 'our skies.'

The bird fell behind a slag heap, the announcement said.
A residential area was not hit.
Civilians are not injured.
The entry added that there is also information of a second plane.
Later the claim of responsibility was removed from the website.

Ukraine's military had 435 self-propelled air-defense systems, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies' annual survey of global military equipment compiled before the unrest in the country began earlier this year.
Those systems are among the more capable air defenses for striking planes at higher altitude.

Related Articles


The Ukrainian inventory included 60 Buk systems with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization designation SA-11 Gadfly, as well as approximately 150 SA-13 Gopher systems, 125 vehicle-mounted SA-8 Gecko units, and 100 SA-4 Ganef systems.
Ukraine also fields the S-300, one of the most sophisticated air-defense systems developed during the Soviet era.

Those require training and technical knowledge that would be difficult for rebels to acquire if they had only recently taken possession of the systemsunless they had previous military training on the equipment.

If it was a Buk, that is a quite sophisticated system that would require some kind of knowledge about how it works, said Douglas Barrie, senior fellow for military aerospace at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London.
This is not the kind of system you can just pick up and use.

The Buk was developed in the Soviet Union and entered service in the late 1970s.
Even early model Buk missiles can strike targets at an altitude of more than 40,000 feet with the missile flying three times the speed of sound, according to data from the Federation of American Scientists.
Each missile has a 121-pound warhead.

Your browser does not support HTML5 video.


0:00 / 0:00

Skip Ad

in 15

U.S. intelligence agencies confirm that a surface-to-air missile was fired at Malaysian Airlines Flight 17.
Retired U.S. Air Force Col.
Cedric Leighton joins the News Hub with Sara Murray to discuss what type of weaponry could have brought down the plane.

A typical system includes three vehicles, one capable of firing the missiles, another transporting the radar to spot potential targets, and a command vehicle.
A target can be fired using only the missile-carrying vehicle, said IHS Jane's Missiles Rockets editor Doug Richardson.

In 2001, Ukraine mistakenly downed a civilian airliner over its territory when it launched a surface-to-air missile during a military exercise.
All 66 passengers and 12 crew members were killed on the flight, which was bound for Novosibirsk from Tel Aviv.

Other recent incidents have involved the shorter range, shoulder-fired weapons.
A Boeing 757 operated by Arkia Israeli Airlines Ltd.
was fired on in 2002 while departing Mombasa, Kenya.
The missiles missed their target.
And in 2003, an Airbus A300 operated by DHL was struck by one such missile while departing Baghdad.
The crew managed to land the plane safely.

In response, some airlinesparticularly those flying in danger zones or are seen as particularly vulnerable to threatshave started to build in defenses.
Israel has required all its commercial jetliners to be equipped with systems to defeat the shoulder-fired missiles, which are usually heat-seeking weapons.
Some aircraft carrying heads of state, like Air Force One, are outfitted with such systems.


Defenses also exist against more-sophisticated radar-guided missilesthat can strike at higher distances, but aren't available on commercial aircraft.

Anton Gerashchenko, an adviser to Ukraine's interior minister, said Ukrainian authorities tried to recover the airliner's black boxes, but that the area was under the control of rebels.
Soon they will be in the hands of Russia, and that will be proof that they are complicit in this matter, he said.

He said that Ukrainian military had received word Thursday from informants behind rebels lines that an antiaircraft missile battery, part of the Buk series, had been deployed by rebels near the border with Russia.

He said that although rebels are blaming the Ukrainian government for the downing, the plane was out of range of Ukrainian batteries when it was hit.
The rebels shot at this plane because they thought it was a military transport, he said.

Paul Sonne contributed to this article.

Write to Robert Wall at robert.wall@wsj.com and Alan Cullison at alan.cullison@wsj.com


