
Netherlands covers up secret pact controlling investigation of MH17 crash


The discussion about who is ultimately responsible for the MH17 tragedy will only be uncovered when an honest constituted method is applied to "all" the evidence.

The "bellingcat report", which is not mentioned here in this article, should have been mentioned because the BUK trail it unravels must be calculated in any comprehension of what really happened.

It is always a possibility that Russia, in a desperate attempt to assist the vulnerable Separatists, took a BUK launcher into Ukraine but got caught in a trap set by other parties.
This is just one of many possibilities that I can contemplate might fit the facts.
There are many others.

Only when open authentic investigation is applied do we have some hope of identifying the guilty.
I have my suspicions that many parties are implicated and keeping the investigation moving in circles while pointing blame towards others.


Interesting article.
May be now You're starting to reach an understanding of who Poroshenko?
And why was America .
Americans make us enemies of Europe.
Think about who benefits from this?
Hello from Russia.


The WSWS has exposed the extreme right-wing character of Poroshenko's regime since the fascist-led coup, which is leading inexorably to a military conflict between NATO and Russia.

However, it would be wrong to pretend that the Russian government has any meaningful way of opposing this.
That government is made up of and serves billionaire oligarchs, many of whom profited from the fall of the USSR.
They are not concerned with the well-being of the East Ukrainian workers, and neither do they care about the Russian workers.
They only seek to exploit them for profit.

Only a united Ukrainian and Russian working class, fighting for socialism with its class brothers and sisters around the world, can put an end to capitalism, which is the root of social inequality and war.


International finance capital benefits primarily.
Obama lied when he said this conflict is "non ideological".
Neoliberalism is an internationalist ideology.
Neoliberalism is attempting to replace all human relations with " the market".
This is such an important goal for the globalist ruling elite they are willing to risk extinction for it .


Absolute madness is going on.
The Kiev regime has conducted numerous false flag attacks....they are the only ones that had the means, motive, opportunity and have benefitted from the tragedy.
Always ask yourself who benefitted most.
The fact the BBC had eyewitness testimony that they put on the internet and then took down also speaks volumes.
Final thing, why hasn't the Dutch Safety Board taken any eyewitness testimony themselves......isn't that normally standard investigative procedure?
Why are they foregoing that aspect?
Oh wait...it took them 3 months just to attempt to get to the wreckage....I guess I shouldn't get my hopes up that they are really concerned about finding out the truth.
Seems the fix is already in.


Speculation be damned.
There is a group of tightly clustered 1.25" bullet holes in the side of the cockpit beneath the window exactly where the pilot was sitting and being as MH17 was flying at 10,100 meters altitude they could not have been fired from the ground.
The Pro Russian separatists do not have any aircraft and nobody has suggested that any Russian aircraft were involved.
All roads lead to Kiev...


This is the shiftiest goddamn thing.
The elites of all countries are veering toward war on a false pretext.
Spread awareness of this cover-up!


"elites of all pro-US countries", you had to say.
russia doesn't need war


The silence in mainstream media speaks volumes.
In some quarters they have switched to diversionary tactics.
Only a few propagandists are still getting mileage out of the official narrative, although user comments appear to be overwhelmingly against them.


Glad to see you here.
Reasonable, intelligent people are beginning to come to the only sane conclusion - capitalism is the problem.
That has to be the base line starting point for coming at any solution.


